[SHORT MUSICAL SOUND]
>> Namaste, and
welcome to "Thrive,
Self-healing with Ayurveda."
In this video, I'm
going to share with you
several ways that we
can understand our body
and its state of
balance and imbalance.
Our body is
constantly offering us
signs that when we read them,
we can understand so much
about what is going
on in our bodies,
even prior to developing
symptoms of any disease
or imbalance.
Ayurveda is a holistic
system of wellness that has
its origins in ancient India.
But it really has
universal application.
In Ayurveda, we
postulate that there
are three primary energies.
These are vata,
pitta, and kapha.
These we call the doshas,
which really means "defect."
When we talk about
doshas, it means the way
that we are defected
from original source.
And each of us has a
predominance of one
or maybe more than one of these
doshas in our constitution.
And then throughout
life, because
of stresses, impacts,
choices, we all
deviate from our
constitution into states
of relative imbalance
and balance.
And so in this video, I'm
going to share with you how
we can read the
signs of the body
to determine our relative
state of well-being.
And the first area that I'll
talk about is our tongues.
Now, if you go to the
mirror with a bright light
and stick out your
tongue, let it be relaxed.
Sometimes people get really
tense with their tongue,
and you actually won't see
what you want to see so.
Let your tongue
relax and just take
note of what you're seeing.
So first, what is the
shape of your tongue?
Is it long, short,
swollen, or very narrow?
All of this will
give us information
about what is going on
in the body, especially
in the digestive track.
The tongue is the end
of the whole snake
of the digestive tract.
And so by reading the tongue,
we can find out what's
going on inside your digestion.
And then we can take
measures to rectify
any imbalance that's there.
Secondly, let's look at
what color the tongue is.
Is it red, more white?
Are there parts that are yellow?
Are there even parts that
are dark or purple or black?
Are there areas
that are cracked?
This is really common.
Is your tongue coated?
Is the coating very thick?
Can you remove that coating
with a tongue scraper?
Each of these
signs in the tongue
tells us a lot of information
about the state of the body.
And when we assess
our tongues, we
can begin to understand
the doshas inside
of our own individuality.
So let's talk a little
bit more about the doshas.
Vata dosha is likened
to air and ether.
It's very light.
It's very dry.
And we can see vata
dosha in our tongues
by the cracks and the
divots in the tongue.
So vata in the tongue
will indicate dryness
in our digestive tracks
and in our bodies.
So a long, central crack
down the center of the tongue
indicates a lot of
vata dosha in the body,
especially in the colon.
And when I see this long crack
down the center of someone's
tongue, I almost always
can ask them, hey,
do you suffer from constipation
or anxiety, headaches, or even
IBS?
And somebody will
always ask me, hey,
how do you know that about me?
And I'm just
looking at the crack
down the center of their tongue.
It's really simple.
And I almost always
see this trait
in people who drink
a lot of coffee
because coffee is very bitter.
And the bitter taste transmits
so much dryness, especially
to the colon.
So also, a tongue that's
very long and narrow
demonstrates a lot of
vata dosha in the body.
Also, if you stick out
your tongue, relax it,
and it starts to
shake or tremor,
that tremoring, again, is
vata dosha in the body.
If you're seeing a lot of signs
of vata dosha on your tongue,
you would want to use the vata
churnas, or spice mixtures,
that I talked to you about
in the video on vata spice
mixtures, or vata chutney to
soothe and tame vata dosha.
Now pitta dosha is like fire.
It's very hot and intense.
And we'll see signs of pitta
dosha accumulating in the body,
especially in a red color
on the sides of the tongue.
And especially if
we see the red color
on the sides of the
tongue, this is a sign
that the energy of
our liver, especially,
which is ruled by
pitta dosha, is
becoming very hot or inflamed.
And when the energy
of the liver is hot,
we can experience irritability,
hot flashes, night sweats,
early morning wakings between
the hours of 2:00 and 4:00 AM.
So if your tongue is very
deep red or red on the sides,
you'll want to cool things down.
You'll want to
decrease pitta dosha.
And cilantro is
especially useful in this,
as is the pitta chutney that I
offered in the chutney cooking
video.
This is a very,
very cooling chutney
that is used with your food.
I often give people with
early morning wakings or night
sweats, hot flashes--
I just have them
use pitta chutney,
and they see a large
decrease in the symptoms
that they're experiencing
because it's so cooling.
Now, you'll see the
third dosha, which
is called kapha dosha,
on the tongue reflected
in areas of the tongue
that might be swollen.
Kapha dosha is like
water and earth.
It's heavy.
It is hard to move.
And so if you see
swelling in the tongue,
you might experience
kapha aggravation
in the form of water retention,
in terms of swelling,
in terms of brain fog.
And so in this case,
you'd want to use
kapha churna in your
food and kapha chutney
to regain balance.
Now, another thing
that's very important
to look at in your tongue is
the coating of your tongue.
A very thick white
coating indicates
what we call ama, or metabolic
waste in the digestive tract.
This is gunk that is undigested.
And in Ayurveda, we consider ama
to be the product of anything
that is an digested.
Ama obstructs the flow
of energy in the body
and is the root cause of
many, many types of diseases.
So we'll always
want to take note
if ama is accumulating
in the body.
Now, that thick, white,
fuzzy coating on the tongue
is especially indicative of ama.
And we can loosen
and eliminate ama
very simply through
sipping on hot water
about every 20 minutes
throughout the day.
We just take a few
sips of hot water.
And this begins to stimulate the
tongue and the digestive tract.
And this helps the
body eliminate ama.
Every area of the tongue
reflects a different organ
of the body.
So the tip of the tongue relates
to the energy of the heart.
The sides of the tongue relate
to the energy of the gall
bladder and the liver.
And then the center
of the tongue
relates to the stomach
and the small intestine.
So we can read the tongue
as a map of our physiology.
We're always carrying
around with us
inside our mouth
something that we
can read to tell
us what's going on
in all of our internal
organs that we can't see.
And modern medical
science would have
to take a picture of
our insides to get
this kind of information.
We can just read our tongue
and learn so much about what's
going on in our bodies.
The back of our tongue
relates to the energy
of the large intestine.
And the sides of the back of the
tongue really to the kidneys.
An Ayurvedic practitioner can
do a very thorough examination
of the tongue and determine
which herbal remedies might
be most appropriate for you,
other dietary advice, aroma
therapy, so many
different remedies.
We actually look at hundreds
of signs in the tongue
and can get very specific.
However, in general,
red indicates
an excess of pitta dosha.
Purple and cracking
indicates vata dosha.
Swelling indicates kapha dosha.
And ama is indicated by a
white coating on the tongue.
Now, we can also see indications
of the doshas accumulating
in our faces and in our bodies.
So now I'm going
to talk about how
we can read our faces and
faces of those around us
to see states of relative
balance and imbalance.
The forehead that relates
to our large intestine.
And vata imbalance
will be indicated
by a large horizontal lines
or cracks on the forehead.
This indicates a lot of anxiety,
a lot of mental pressure
in the nervous system.
Pitta imbalance,
indicated by flashing,
pinkish red skin
color, and red pinpoint
moles, and/or swelling.
Alcohol really
increases pitta dosha
because it's so
inflammatory and heating.
And we know that
when you see somebody
who's a chronic
drinker, drinks a lot,
they may have a red nose.
Like, we see that in cartoons.
That's a sign of pitta
dosha on the face.
Kapha imbalance will be
indicated by swelling
or by things like lipomas.
Ama will be indicated
by acne, by pimples,
by dull, pasty
skin because ama is
where there's blockage in flow.
Now, the cheeks
correspond to our lungs.
A line just below the
cheek ending in the nose
can indicate
malabsorption when we
aren't reabsorbing our foods.
Blue lines on the
cheeks indicate
lung stress and stagnation
of blood flow in the lungs.
Flushed cheeks, again, show
increased pitta in activity.
So doing a lot of exercise will
increase the fires of the body.
And so you get flushed cheeks.
Just like taking alcohol,
your cheeks will flush.
Pimples on the cheeks and
show a weakness of digestion
because the cheeks will show
that ama is affecting the lung
area.
We've got some
stagnation in the lungs.
The chin corresponds to
the reproductive organs
or the lower abdomen.
So especially women
oftentimes break out
in their chin around the
time of their moon cycle.
And this is because
the chin corresponds
to our reproductive
organs and hormones.
A horizontal line across the
chin indicates low libido.
Pimples or acne indicate
ama in the lower abdomen,
like the colon, the
reproductive system.
And a vertical line in the chin
relates to vata aggravation,
especially in the prostate.
As always, you spices, foods,
and herbs that alleviate
the main dosha imbalance.
So this can be really confusing.
People always get
confused about this.
So if there's a
vata imbalance, you
will use spices,
herbs, other products
that are labeled for vata.
And what it actually
means is it's vata
reducing because we're trying
to reduce the accumulation
of that dosha in the body.
Now, finally we can
examine our body type
for signs of our dosha
constitution or our propensity.
And there's so many ways to dial
in what is your constitution.
I look at people's bodies.
I also look at Vedic
astrological charts,
or jyotish, to determine
the constitution of a client
when they come in.
Bodies that find it difficult
to gain weight or tend
towards dry skin
and constipation
tend to be more vata dosha.
Someone who's more
vata will have
a great deal of enthusiasm.
They can also be anxious,
and their handshake
will be really light and dry.
When someone with a lot of vata
dosha is faced with stress,
they often will say, oh,
my god, what did I do?
They manifest it in an anxiety
drawn back onto themselves.
Now, someone who is more pitta
dosha will have a medium build.
They'll have a warm,
firm handshake.
They'll be direct.
They'll be intense.
When they are faced with
stress, the person who
is very pitta dosha will
say, what did you do?
They'll tend to place
the blame externally.
Someone who is more kapha dosha
will have a heavier build.
They're the people
who are very warm.
You just want to
give them a hug.
They give the best hugs.
Their handshakes are very--
they're like a
warm, fluffy pillow.
And they oftentimes will have
problems with retaining weight
or heaviness in the body.
So each part of our
body is like a hologram.
And it allows us to
understand every other body
part and the whole body itself.
So in this video, I
highlighted the tongue,
the face, the whole body
as areas of assessment.
We can also examine
our eyes, our nails,
the tenor of our voice,
our urine, our elimination,
our skin, all as
assessment tools
to understand our bodies
unique bio-individual patterns
of balance and imbalance.
A body that is in balance
has deep restful sleep,
strong digestion, regular,
well-formed elimination,
and for women, uneventful
menstruation, so no cramping,
pain, bloating.
When any of these four
areas are lacking,
it's an indication
that balance is waning.
And we can use these
simple tools of analysis
to understand how that balance
can be returned to the body
and to the mind.
I really hope that
this information
has been useful for you.
I know it's a lot.
And it may be a bunch of
new information for you.
That's OK.
You can take time to watch
this video over and over again.
And each time you'll gain
a deeper understanding
of your body's symptoms
and how to work
with them to create harmony.
You can empower yourself
with this ancient knowledge
that will allow you to harmonize
your health and your life.
Enjoy.
Thank you for joining me.
Namaste.
Don't forget to explore
the rest of this series
by watching our docuseries,
yoga practices, meditations,
and self-care videos.
[FLUTE SOUND]